
 - All right, thanks everyone. Good afternoon. I'm excited to co-present work done by my coauthors Sylvia Simioni and Xuecong Xu who's unfortunately unable to be here today.
 So online shopping is pervasive. And recent predictions suggest that consumers could spend up to $100 billion annually by 2022 or 2024 on online grocery shopping alone. However the majority of the users of such services tend to be highly educated, affluent, and technically adept.
 While online grocery shopping can create numerous societal opportunities such as improved equity. It is unknown how beneficial these services are or could be among users who are traditionally underrepresented in such services.
 Online grocery delivery services present new opportunities to address food disparities, especially for those individuals living in transportation scarce and low income areas. These individuals often face difficulties in maintaining a healthy diet. Not only because of the lack of their financial resources, but the presence of food deserts or urban and suburban areas with limited access to supermarkets. Such areas often have easier access to convenience stores and fast food restaurants than healthier options leaving residents in these areas with limited access to healthy food.
 Therefore to build on the growing thread of research to understand opportunities for technology to address limited access to transportation and healthy food among such communities we posed three research questions.
 First does the online grocery delivery model serve as a feasible model to provide healthy food access to low income and transportation scarce individuals? Why or why not?
 Secondly does an online grocery delivery service lead to healthier food choices? Why or why not?
 Finally what opportunities exist for online grocery delivery services, for online grocery delivery services designed to support healthy choices among individuals living in low income and transportation scarce environments.
 Because we are limited on time and because we were unable to gain statistical power in addressing our second question we will address the first and third research questions in today's talk. However we encourage you to read our paper. Because our preliminary results suggest yes. Online grocery delivery services can lead to healthier food choices. And we propose opportunities for the community to conduct further research in this area.
 First I'll quickly discuss the online grocery delivery service that we selected. Shipt. Shipt is a Target owned internet-based grocery delivery service that allows users to place orders on items sold by major retailers such as Meyer and Target. The service offers same day delivery and we selected Shipt because of its availability in Southeastern Michigan. At $14 per month it also had the most affordable membership compared to similar services such as Instacart and AmazonFresh. And we knew from our past work that cost was a facilitator to the use of emerging markets, emerging technologies.
 So once you join the service you can select available major retailers in your area. In the case of our participants Meyer and Target

 You can interact with shoppers if problems arise before receiving your delivery. Note that there's a free delivery on everything over $35. This is U.S. dollars. Otherwise you have to pay about $7 per delivery. You then rate the shopper based on his or her performance.
 For context, our study took place in Southeastern Michigan and primarily Metropolitan Detroit which offers a rich opportunity for understanding and addressing transportation challenges. In fact as we'll discuss in our session on Thursday, this is the reflection session, 36% of census tracts in Detroit have been designated as food deserts by the U.S. government.
 We recruited participants with limited access to transportation who lived


 To aid in our recruiting we drew from our prior research that suggest the use of trusted organizations to recruit in low resource contexts. Therefore we recruited from local workforce development programs. We also circulated advertisements through mailing lists, library bulletin boards, community centers, and at bus stops. This insured the likelihood that we would be recruiting from low resource contexts and in transportation scarce regions. We also used snowball sampling.
 So we conducted a pilot study which consisted of a controlled field experiment. To conduct this experiment we randomly assigned 20 participants to either the Shipt group or the control group.
 We onboarded Shipt participants to use the online grocery delivery application Shipt for one month. We instructed the remaining individuals to save their grocery receipts for one month. We then collected the receipts from the non Shipt group to compare food purchases with the orders from the Shipt participants.
 Finally we conducted our interviews at the end of the pilot experiment which were recorded and transcribed. We interviewed Shipt participants to understand their experience using the application and service to get a sense of how feasible the service was. We asked our Shipt and non-Shipt participants questions to learn about their purchase patterns and general questions about their grocery shopping routines including where they shopped and how they got there.
 Note that we compensated those in the Shipt group by paying for a one month membership. Again this was $14 at the time. We also preloaded their accounts with a $50 credit which also removed the need for participants to have credit cards. We compensated non-Shipt members $64 or the equivalent of the credit card and cost of membership in cash after they completed their exit interviews.
 So our data included field notes taken during the recruitment process, interview transcripts, our Shipt participants' online shopping history, and our control groups' participant receipts which again we don't discuss in our presentation but we do in our paper. And finally we collected demographic surveys.
 Note that the average income and race of our participants was consistent with that of the city of Detroit. Participants on average had a yearly income of $21,000 U.S. dollars. And they were predominantly of African American descent. Our participants average age was 49. And three participants reported a disability. Now I'm going to turn it over to Sylvia to discuss the results.
 - To begin we use our interview results to determine whether our online delivery model enables access to healthy food in regions that our low resourced. Upon being interviewed all participants chose their own pseudonym by which we refer to them in the paper and our talk.
 We find four factors that elucidates the benefits and barriers the service brings to this community. Let's focus on the good first. Participants in the Shipt group like the service for its convenience and accessibility. Compared to the control participants their purchases were quicker, they shopped more frequently, and they found the app allowed for fresh food options and eliminated the need for travel. One participant with a physical disability reported difficulty going up and down the stairs. She was especially satisfied because the service allowed her to get groceries delivered right to her door.
 The second positive factor was the service reliability and quality offered by the delivery model.
 This speaks to the outstanding service provided by the shoppers at Pick and Deliver. Our participant Rachel for instance enjoyed staying in touch with her shopper Sholanda to substitute items that were in stock. Participants appreciated the shoppers' cordiality
 Though worth noting is that all the participants care deeply about the ability to see, touch, and select fresh food items. LoveBug says, "I believe they will pick the best, you know,
 Yet our participants are extra cautious because of their prior experiences in finding at their near stores, meat and produce that doesn't meet their standards.
 As Keisha says, "It's hard shopping "at the markets in my area. "A lot of the stuff is outdated. "You have to watch out for the expiration dates, "the freshness, the cleanliness of the markets. "A lot of them aren't up to code." Based on the receipts we collected we learned that 50% of the stores where participants shopped were either local slaughter houses or the farmers' market which is to say places where they're willing to go out of their way to get fresh items. Or dollar stores, gas stations, and convenience shops that are closer but offer a limited stock. So as far as Shipt participants showing some reluctance about having a shopper select on their behalf, this did not stop them from buying items that are fresh on the app. Overall participants in this group were pleased with their shoppers and the quality of their groceries.
 However there are two major aspects of the grocery delivery model that hindered its feasibility. Even though we gave participants in the Shipt group a credit to buy groceries during the study, they immediately noted issues with incompatible payment methods that would prevent them from using Shipt in the future. Participants from both groups showed they used the electronic benefits transfer card to receive federal nutrition assistance that they may swipe at most brick and mortar stores. Yet this method is not supported by the service.
 However I want to focus primarily on the limited social interaction noted by our participants.
 Obviously grocery delivery apps inherently remove the social experience of shopping in person. Rachel, our most senior participant, said that grocery shopping was an opportunity to get moving and stay physically active. It also supports the value of connection and at times friendship.
 Rachel said it best, "When we were kids "shopping was an experience. "I remember getting dressed up to go downtown. "Kids now lose out on so much because "you know, you get together with your sisters, "or your friends and you go shopping "and you have an experience. That's what is missing "when you do online shopping."
 Loyalty is another social value our participants observed. Particularly when it comes to the experience of shopping in person. Some of our findings suggest that this community is loyal to local specialty stores like meat markets that offer Grade A or halal items.
 Rosemary said that she managed to get her whole family to shop at one of the specialty meat markets because quote, "It's the best meat "and the taste is totally different from any store." Our interviews indicate there is a link between social communion and the desire to access fresh healthy food.
 Finally we present key points from our discussion to answer our third question and explore opportunities for design to support the health of the communities with low income and scarce transportation.
 Today I will be focusing on two, and I encourage you to check out our paper for further insights.
 drawing upon research from Walker et al on disparities found in food deserts. We know that the addition of a new more expensive health food store in town will not necessarily mean that residents will flock to it. People instead tend to remain loyal to the current stores because they are familiar and affordable. Likewise we found in our study that when they have a chance participants will go to the stores where they can find the best meat, the best produce. To mitigate the risk of grocery chains putting these smaller stores at risk we recommend all delivery services to partner with local vendors.
 when designing interventions to encourage healthy eating. In our paper you can find receipt data from both participant groups that suggest that users in the Shipt group bought a higher percentage of healthy items even though many of them reported their shopping habits remained more or less the same. Precisely what it means to eat healthy can be largely cultural. According to James in 2004, folks with African American descent may view eating healthy as giving up on their cultural heritage and conforming to the dominant culture. Plus in HCI research from Parker and Grenter in 2014 shows that health systems ought to consider the value of collectivism that is deeply embedded within the African American community. We find in HCI an appropriate space to build on this population's sense of community while engendering positive health behaviors but only with accounts for the nuanced traditions their norms of communication, and ancestral beliefs in consuming of food for soulful nourishment. Soul food after all is extremely delicious, and consists of dishes like macaroni and cheese, fried chicken, and collard greens that we love in the United States but know are high in fat and calories. We therefore suggest the option for online services to promote healthy recipes and selection behaviors that are based not only on the individual's past purchases but those of their community. Pairing with these guidelines were digital coupons and seek it all suggestions to provide users with meaningful and actual advice may boost perceptions of affordability and health empowerment.
 In summary we conducted a pilot experiment with 20 individuals living in low resource areas to understand the feasibility of online grocery delivery services in enabling access to healthy food. We found the model does work in offering convenience, accessibility, service reliability, and food quality to our participants. Although we have discussed policy and design opportunities to address issues with low limited social interaction that accounted for loyalty to local health food vendors and supporting other community values with culture conscious health strategies. Our work provides implications for how the CHI community can design online grocery delivery services that better meet the needs of populations in food deserts. It paves for paths for researching has on interventions mainly to sustain positive health behaviors over time. And lastly we would like to thank the National Science Foundation for their funding support as well Jacob Berman, The Social Innovations Group, and Michigan Interactive and Social Computing for their feedback. Thank you and I'm happy to take your questions. (crowd applauds) - [Announcer] For questions please use the microphones at the next to the doors. Or raise your hand if you can't get to the microphone. - [Andy] My name's Andy Warren from Uber. One of the products I actually work on is UberEats and when we're actually studying grocery delivery, food delivery a lot there's an interesting dynamic when you have a multi-sided marketplace. And I was wondering, and when I say multi-sided marketplace I mean you have the consumer who is getting delivery but then also the food vendors who are providing that, the shoppers who might be shopping for it, and then also the people who might be doing the delivery. I was wondering how did this come into account with the study that you were conducting here? - You wanna take that? - Thank you, it's Andy? Thanks Andy for your question. So I'm gonna repeat for live stream. So you're asking about the additional stakeholders that are involved in this process how do they come into place. So we do acknowledge a limitation in our study that the shopper is one stakeholder that we were unable to interact with and we believe it might be interesting to explore how these shoppers are being rated, these are their jobs. But I think the implication for the stores is a sense of loyalty which Sylvia mentioned in her segment of the presentation because a lot of people are loyal to certain stores and if these stores aren't participating then it's hard for them to maintain that loyalty. So I guess from an UberEats perspective I'm not quite sure how these third party, how they're involved, right? How do they sign up? Or how do they engage? But at least for our populations I would encourage you all if you have the ability to go to these local vendors and see if they would be interested in participating. Because we did, that sense of loyalty did show up. And there was one more stakeholder so that yeah our study looked at the shoppers themselves right. So what you hear in this presentation is that perspective. - [Dane] Hey Dane Cosley, Cornell. So I'm trying to think about how much of the benefit from the point of view of the participants was about positive health behaviors and healthy eating. And how much of it was sort of about convenience and experience right? Because in the what you presented a lot of it was more about the experience than the healthy eating and so I was just wondering if you could talk a little more about any parts that were about the healthiness, I mean obviously access to better food than is available locally, that's the dimension of healthy but do they talk about other parts of it? - Yes, so in our paper when we further explore the second research question, the aspect of impulse buying came into effect especially when purchasing in brick and mortar stores. We had one participant who said that the experience of shopping online actually limited those impulse buying habits which enabled her to purchase healthier food items as opposed to being at a checkout line, we are prone to being more distracted. So yes we did have some evidence of that in our paper. - [Dane] Okay - Thank you. - I'm sorry, did you have any more about, how many of the people were in caregiving relationships? Because I have a three year old now and my experience of grocery shopping is very different than it used to be. and so I was wondering if that was part of-- - Yes so early on our demographic slides,
 - Did we, okay. So the number of dependents, the average number of dependents in our study per participant was about two. So the impact of children was not necessarily as potent in our research. But we have explored how the effect of children can affect the process and it is unclear whether they either enable certain negative health behaviors or hinder them. So yeah. - [Announcer] We have time for one quick question.
 - [Woman] I guess I'll ask it.
 and like cultural recipes being relevant. Did you find any tensions with the vendors in that aspect
