- Thank you.
Hello, good morning everyone.
So, I'm Irni from Universiti Teknologi MARA.
Today I would like to present my paper with my co-author, Corina Sas from Lancaster University on the topic of an exploration of Bitcoin mining practices, focusing on miners' trust, challenges, and motivations.
So, Bitcoin is a cryptocurrency, which unlike fiat currency is created through a process called mining.
This process is conducted on blockchain technology by a distributed network miners who both collaborate and compete with each other to solve algorithm problems for validating Bitcoin transactions between anonymous parties.
Mining is also called as trustless because it does not require any third party to verify transactions depending only on the consensus among miners.
Mining also occurs in the absence of any central authority regarding regulating.
It is decentralized as well as transparent, as any validation transaction is recorded on public ledger and can not be longer modified.
For their work on validating Bitcoin transactions miners are financially rewarded.
Okay here, oops, sorry.
Okay, sorry.
Okay.
Okay here, if you can see here is an overview of Bitcoin mining practices, okay? So let's say Alice pays Bob for one Bitcoin.
For this she needs the public key of Bob's wallet's address as well as the public key and private key of her wallet with address to sign the transaction.
They create the transactions to be verified by full nodes, which is the machine's verified rules according to the predefined consensus rules.
Once verified, the transaction is broadcasted to the memory pool, which a place that holding the pending transaction which awaits miners' validations.
Miners then collect such transactions from the memory pool and put them in a block that's sized up to one megabyte.
The miners compete by using the computational power by solving the blocks and produce the proof of work.
The first miners who produce the quickest and longest solutions to the block's transaction is the winner which will receive the financial rewards.
The new block validated by the winning miners is recorded on the public ledger, and finally the transaction is recorded on the public ledger as a permanent, which is visible to everybody.
While HCI work has started to explore how people use Bitcoins, miners' work remains largely invisible and has been less explored.
In this research, we focus on four research questions which these are the questions targeted: miners' motivations, the blockchain's characteristics, impacting on miners' trust, how is the mining practice socially organized, and which are the trust challenges and how do miners attempt to mitigate them? In order to address these research questions, we conducted interview with 20 Bitcoin miners in Malaysia between the end of 2015 until February 2016.
Malaysia offers a unique opportunity for exploration Bitcoin practices in it experienced massive growth of remittance market and a growing interest in cryptocurrency.
Being a developing country, Malaysia is the first to consider fintech regulations.
We ask about participants motives for mining, their perceived benefit and challenges and in particular, trust issues.
We also explore their perception and risk of mitigating strategies.
Based on interviews, we have highlighted several important findings.
First is the motivation of miners.
Almost half participants mentioned that they mine because of financial reward they could earn from mining.
People also enjoy the limited regulation regarding the taxation of such rewards.
For a few others, the motivation to mine really is due to curiosity towards the technology and desire experimenting Bitcoin mining.
Findings also reveal the blockchain's supporting hindering miners' trust.
First, one such factor supporting miners' trust includes the decentralized and transparent qualities for mining protocols.
These are valued by participants in terms of security.
Mining protocol uses cryptographic hashing algorithm to ensure that Bitcoin transaction is not fake.
This supports miners' trust, in addition all miners working on the same blockchain transparently to compete with each other.
Second, mining practice is mostly unregulated and not considered illegal.
This limits the perceived risks of banks, governments to control mining activities.
Finally, mining practice is also considered easy as it does not require advanced technical skills.
Our findings indicate three types of mining practices based on being performed individual or collectively, and own or lease machines.
16 participants started mining in 2010 to 2012 using home solo method mining individually on their computers at home.
At that time, the difficulty of mining was not as high as today.
Later, due to the increase of competitiveness miners needed to upgrade their machine while running and maintenance costs are also increased.
Hence, four of our participants discontinued mining and the rest moving towards collaborative minings by joining home pools, while using their own machines.
But still using their own machines.
The profit was divided according to the amount of power which each miner contributed to the pool.
Again, due to the fact of increase in cost, in particular those for continual upgrading of the machine, 12 of our participants discontinued mining.
The remaining four moved towards collective mining on leased machines.
One of them owned a data center while the other three participants started mining on leased machine in the data center for cloud mining.
Finding indicate three types of miners.
One is the mining pool administrator, who facilitates miners' access to mining pool.
This type of miners has advanced skill to set up, run and maintain the machine within the pools.
The other type of data center administrator who provide end miners opportunity of leasing machine hosted and maintain their data centers.
Finally, we have end miners who can have limited skills, even lower those required for home solos.
This is because they merely pay for leasing a machine in larger pool.
Hence, we can see a serious continual deskilling of miners as they move towards collective mining.
Also, in contrast with pool administrator, end miners have limited power, and in order to remain competitive, they have to follow the trends set by their pool administrator.
For example, continually increase the leasing fees for demand upgrading machines to ensure the competitiveness.
There are several trust challenges of collaborative mining.
First, from the technical perspective we can see there is a risk of mining protocol.
This relates time required for recording the new block.
This is because current practice is to wait not three as before, but six confirmation to register a block, which leads to delay.
This is also limiting block size, as each block have to hold up to one megabyte of transactions.
With larger volume of transactions, the bottleneck issue contributes to increased competitiveness and increased miners' fees.
From social perspective, collective miners leads to centralization and issues to end miners' distrust in mining administrators.
This are due to the lack of the audit for distribution rewards in pool.
The invisibility of data centers, some being exclusively in the cloud with no information on their physical presence.
Findings indicates two strategies of end miners mitigating challenges of collaborative mining.
Sorry.
Okay.
First is choosing a reputable pool so that, most of participant join three to four largest major pool.
End miners also interested in building their own decentralized pool, such as P2P pool without need the pool administrators.
In order to reflect on the theoretical implications of our findings, we apply the Bitcoin transferring work consisting three layers of trust and their stakeholders, and refine them prospective of Bitcoin miners.
Thus, with respect to institutional trust, miners distrust financial and government institution.
But, the unregulation of mining practices mitigates their perceived risk of abuse of power.
With respect to social trust, outcomes suggest that the main challenge is not among the end miners due to the mining protocol, but between the end miners and the dishonest pools also the data center administrator.
This is the most problematic layers of trust.
Our finding also indicate that the purpose for design decentralization unregulation features strengthen the miners' technological trust in blockchain.
And this is the least problematic layers of trust.
Despite decentralization being a key principal of blockchain, findings show a strong tendency toward the centralization of mining practices.
This paradox point to the need for solution to minimize the monopoly of powers such large pools can acquire.
While unregulation is another key principle blockchain is valued, it's raised challenges with respect to dishonest administrators.
Our design implication aim to address both of these concerns.
Finally, in order to address the concern, to address the risk of the decentralization of mining we can think of authoring tools for supporting end miners' development of decentralized pool with no central administrators.
To address the social trust challenges of dishonest administrators, we can imagine a new tool for monitoring hash power, and reward for distribution in the data center and mining pools, as well as decentralized tool for tracking data center's authorization and reputation.
We can think of developing fully decentralized pool with no central administrators.
Alright, thank you.
(crowd applauds) - [Woman] Thank you very much, is it working? - Thank you.
- [Woman] Yeah, brilliant work.
Thank you very much.
So I have a question regarding other kinds of blockchains.
It seems that there's a difference between, well I'm always concerned that people mislead blockchain for Bitcoin blockchain, and other blockchains have different ways of operating.
I wonder if you have thought about other blockchains as well, or for instance, Hyperledger, that tries to sort out the other layers of trust.
- Alright, okay, thank you.
Yeah, Bitcoin is the pioneer for blockchain because blockchain is created by Satoshi Nakamoto for Bitcoin cryptocurrency but today blockchain has moved beyond Bitcoin.
It's more than Bitcoin.
So, in this research we are focusing on Bitcoin mining, so we interviewed the Bitcoin miners.
Yeah, maybe in future there should be other future works to explore other types of mining in other kind of blockchain as well.
Thank you.
- [Megan] Megan Knittel, Michigan State University.
So in your study, you talked about how some of your participants changed from mining independently to mining in a pool or in another collective manner.
I was wondering in your findings if you noticed any differences in motivations for using Bitcoin at all between the people who moved from independent mining to a pool, or stopped mining altogether.
- Alright.
So what I can see, the motivation of the miners when they shift from home or solo mining to the collaborative mining, the issue is because of financial.
Because they need a lot of financial to maintain their machine in order for them to, to continuously mine the Bitcoin.
So as the difficulty increase, some of them are not capable to proceed with the mining, so some drop off.
Maybe some of them with higher capital proceed with the mining in the pool, and yeah.
Thank you.
- [Moderator] And I do have a question myself as well.
So I'm wondering, because one of the strategies is to move the miners from actually monopolizing the whole blockchain.
So how do you think miners can be encouraged, how can miners be encouraged to not monopolize? - Okay, so in our paper we have suggest to create a platform for end miners to create their own mining pool.
So in a way, that is how they can encourage miners to continuously mining, yeah.
- [Moderator] Awesome, thank you.
- Thank you. - I'd like to thank Irni again please. - Thank you.
