- Thank you.
Good.
Yes.
And this was worked on in my research group together with Tarja Salmela and Ashley Colley.
So, what this talk is about, so basically the topic addressed here is to do with the mobile technology and the couples in bed, and this is in the cross section of that.
So basically, this is how the bedroom at night should look like, more or less, yeah? (audience laughs) And this is, then, how it might look like, yep.
And not only that, but actually this.
Yeah.
And this is the basically the topic what we are exploring.
So, what kind of practices do couples have for individual and shared technology use in bed? So, mobile technology, so basically, phones, phones or tablets.
And what are the perceived effects of the mobile technology used in bed? So, related work, a few words about that.
So, there's, like, an extensive amount of research in the smartphone use, I think everybody in this room, like, published at least one smartphone paper, right? (audience laughs) Yep.
So, there's a lot of that about, like, social interaction, and use of apps and so on, and so on.
But then, during recent years, there has been, like, more and more about this, attention in media, especially about the negative effects of the technology.
And also, not just in the media, but also, like, research has addressed this.
So, what are the consequences of having mobile technology as a constant companion? For instance, like, the problematic usage of, like, addiction to the phones.
Then this fear of missing out.
Like, you have to check the Facebook so that you don't miss something, like what's happening in your social circles.
Also there's, like, there's a feeling that technology replaces the situated, the face-to-face communication, for instance.
And also this discussion that the use of smartphones is perceived inappropriate in certain contexts.
For instance, at the dinner table, and so on.
And related to that, for instance, like, what are the family rules and practices on the phone usages, like, what do you want to teach your children? Like, don't have your phone on the table, and so on.
So, there's a lot of research on this, constance related to technologies.
But there's not so much research around this co-located couples and mobile technology used in bed.
And this is what we are looking at in our paper.
Bed as a context of technology use has mostly been looked at from the viewpoint of sleep, like, sleep quality.
So, things like social media use or mobile phone use in bed have negative effects on sleep quality, and then as a consequence, there can be something like depression or anxiety, and so on.
But what we are interested in is more this socio-cultural aspect of using the technology.
So, we are not focusing on the sleep quality in our paper.
Okay.
And basically, what we have conducted is a user study.
Actually, two user studies where the first one was interviews of couples.
So, altogether, six couples, 12 people.
And the interviews were conducted at home, and including the bedroom, yeah.
And then, we had, in order to get a little bit wider set of data, we conducted, also, an online survey with Mechanical Turk with 117 participants who were living in a relationship, an established relationship.
And basically, did a qualitative analysis on that.
And what we have questions on basically was about the sleeping arrangements and the sleep-wake rhythm people had.
Mobile technology use at home in general and especially to then, like, compare that in the context of the mobile technology use in bed including the visual and auditory environment, the motivations, the bodily positions, and the effects on intimacy and verbal communication.
And this is like a typical picture, like, how the phones end up, what's the location of the phones in the bedroom.
So, hopefully a lot of people seem to, like, charge their phones in the bedroom and then use it as an alarm clock, for instance.
Yep.
So, findings.
So, like, a basic phenomena here is that using a smartphone or using phones or tablets in bed, it's very common.
So, we can think that, like, it seems that roughly three quarters of people use the phone in the shared bed either simultaneously or, like, separately.
But then using a shared device is much less common.
So, basically, here, it's about, like, 20% in our sample used a shared device at least once a week.
And then, what do people use the phone for? It's mostly for relaxation.
So, this was, like, the most typical area that came up the most.
So, relaxation, entertainment.
Some news reading, planning the future activities for next day, then friends, communicating with friends.
And then also, like, some specifically say that they do not use phones or technology in bed.
And there were some positive effects on taking the technology in bed is there's seems to be this quite common practice of having a shared cozy time, like, people have this, like, coming to the bed, and then using phones or tablets, like, as a routine before getting to sleep, and also it's kind of like, it's apparent that it's, like, a peaceful moment together even if the device used is, like, done alone or shared.
And this use of technology supports discussions, like, commenting on social circles, okay, like, what somebody has done somewhere or planning the activities for the next day or, like, what should we do, this or that, what are we going to do on a holiday? And so on.
And also comments on the entertainment.
For instance, like, one couple was commenting on, like, they play some game and then they keep swearing together, like, how badly they do in some field, and so on.
So, this is like the positive effect on technology usage.
And out of our material, there's like multiple meanings of the bedroom.
So, a bedroom as a site for entertainment with the technology.
But then, on the other hand, there also came up this sentiment that bedroom, some people keep bedroom as a sanctuary, like, where they especially don't want to have technology in and, like, this comment, "We don't allow them," like, mobile phones or tablets, "in the bedroom at all." And this also relates to the idea of having a bedroom as a sanctuary, like some other practices like, for instance, like, you want to keep the bedroom clean or you want to keep the outside work out of the bedroom.
Like this comment, like, "When you start vacuuming, "the bedroom is vacuumed first." It's like the most important to someone.
So, there's this kind of practice in some families or with some couples.
But there's also, we found evidence on this, like, bedroom as a site for excessive technology use and where it can create some conflicts, for instance.
Like, "You can't get to sleep in peace because "there's something beeping all the time.
"There comes a Facebook message, then another." And so on, and so on.
And so, there was also these negative effects.
And then, talking about the bedroom, then there's the intimacy and sexual intimacy also comes in the picture.
So, mostly people didn't see that mobile technology has an effect on their sex lives, but there was some, like, occasional comments, either for or against, like, supporting or not supporting.
Like, well, a couple of times that ruined the mood.
Or then, on the other hand, like, using, like, sexual related material before sex.
So, a few of those comments came up.
But this disturbed sleep because of the phone or tablet usage.
So, that was relatively common, or surprisingly common, we were surprised about this.
So basically, either the noise of the partners or your own phone wakes you up, or the light wakes you up.
And also, when you wake up at night, and you look at the time from your phone, and then you start doing something else, that it carries you away to check your social media or something like that.
And they said that, so, kind of like, more or less based on our sample, maybe 10% or so of people wake up on the phone on a daily basis, on weekly basis.
So, it really is actually a big effect if you think of the society.
And then, like, there's these different strategies to avoid disturbing the partner.
So basically, the most common were, like, setting the phones on the low volume or silent, dimming the screen light, and this, like, making clear that you don't use the technology in bed.
So, leaving the technology behind, like, in the kitchen to charge, and so on.
Or stepping out of the room if you wanted to use the phone.
So, that took place.
Then, also, this use of other gadgets in order not to disturb the other.
So, use of headphones or using blindfolds, like a mask to cover your eyes if you want to sleep and the other one is using their phone.
And then, funnily, it's surprisingly common that people use it, like, under the blanket, the phone under the blanket, like, eh.
So, clearly, like, covering yourself up in order not to disturb the other.
And there's also, like, we found quite a lot of responses on this, like, what kind of negotiation and tolerance practices that take place.
So, people wanted to take care that they don't disturb their partner when they fall asleep.
Like, either creating common rules or using negotiation either, like, verbally or bodily, like, coming closer together or getting apart, and so on, and using that as a negotiation practice.
And also this, like, you just tolerate, like, okay, my partner just eats like that and I can't help it and, yeah, it's not a problem, we have agreed about it, that kind of thing.
So, wrapping up.
So, the takeaway messages of our research is that, basically that, first of all, the use of mobile technology in a shared bed is common and it has both positive and negative effects.
And definitely this positive effect is, like, say if it's a routine or, like, it facilitates this kind of like coziness between partners and they can discuss around the same topics, and so on, then spend time together.
But also there's negative effects especially to do with, like, the sleep disturbance.
At least, like, people do employ different strategies not to disturb their partner.
So, they paid attention to that.
Not always necessarily well, not always successfully, but anyway, again, it was an effort to try to not to disturb the partner's sleep.
But then, on the other hand, it's, especially from the interviews, it came up, like, it is considered part of the normal life that the sleep is occasionally disturbed by phones.
And I think this is interesting especially thinking like how much attention we now give to the all kinds of, like, wellness tracking applications and sleep tracking, and so on, but then people, on the other hand, like, accept that this just happens, it's normal.
And then I think this was also very interesting that sometimes and with some couples, the bedrooms are treated as sanctuaries where there are specific rules to limit the technology use.
Okay.
And that concludes my talk.
(applause) - Questions? (audience murmurs) (muffled) Can you come here, or...? (muffled) - [Woman] So, is, like, listening to a podcast considered using technology, using a smartphone in bed? - Yes.
- [Woman] I was wondering if it's more around the screen thing, you know, listening to a podcast, it's a voice thing, it's just, like, more auditory than visual.
- Yeah so, on that kind of matter, are then the use of headphones, and so on, in place of video.
But yes, that's considered as part of it, yeah.
(muffled) - [Man] With the agreed upon rules for how much technology use is too much or when they can use it, did you find instances where one person in the couple wanted to use technology in the bedroom more than the other, or one did and one didn't? - Yes.
- [Man] And how did they deal with that? - Yep.
So, yes, we did.
And especially, like, in the interviews, because the interviews lasted, like, one and a half hours per couple, so there was actually quite a lot of descriptions of the family practices and so on.
And for instance, there could be, like, that one person was, like, checking work emails or had to be more online because of the work, and then in some occasions, it was accepted, like, yeah, well, that's part of your job and you just need to do that.
So, that's like this kind of tolerating.
But there's also, there was occasions that the partner was annoyed, like, yeah, you just keep looking at your, like, Whatsapp messages or Facebook and I want to sleep or I want to spend some time with you.
Like woo-hoo, I'm here, and why do I even be in this bed with you, that kind of thing.
(laughs) So, there was like also evidence on that.
And then, also, with one couple interviewed, they had made a rule, like, they said that the technology usage or phone usage got out of hand and then they made a rule that they wanted to really limit it, like, they made a decision on that.
So, we found out that there was evidence on that.
- [Man] Thank you.
(muffled) - [Man 2] Kai Bukov, University of Washington.
I had a question about how the negotiation of mobile technology use in bed compares to other technologies, if you could expand upon, like, television which I know is extremely common in bedrooms in America and how that contrasts to negotiating mobile technologies.
- So, we didn't especially look at that.
So, we focused on the mobile technology usage.
But basically, technology usage is so common in families that it's definitely like people, they had smartphones and they had all other kinds of technologies and so on, so I think the media usage is such a practice which has been, like, entwined into every day life that it's a river, that kind of thing.
But we didn't especially look at, like, TVs or like situated technology.
So, that would be something to, for instance, look in the future, yeah.
- [Man 2] Thank you.
- Okay so, one more question, David, do you want to-- - [David] He asked my question.
