
 Design Informatics, and I'm here with my colleague, Kruakae Pothong, she's gonna magically appear in the middle of the presentation to pick up from the part that she contributed to the work, mostly contributed to the work. And Kruakae is from Science, Technology, Engineering, and Public Policy, University College, London. And we are here to present our work, which is really an attempt to combine our expertise in design and policy research to look for ways to discuss issues around autonomous systems with the public, particularly in the context of energy.
 So I think we're all aware that digital platforms and products are gaining different levels of autonomy. Perhaps we are not really reaching the vision of fully distributed autonomous societies, but you might have, for instance, have had your identity checked on your way to this conference, to Glasgow, and this might have involved some level of computational decision-making regarding your ability to travel.
 And we are also aware that autonomous systems are designed and as a result of human design they're also embedded with particular values.
 So how can we guarantee that these values are in line with those of people who are affected by the decisions made by these systems? Discussing these issues with those affected, of course, is paramount, but I also think that this is particularly challenging,
 and it's challenging for three main reasons. So first of all is the seamlessness of the technology that is designed to collect data and process data, but which make decisions in the background, and these decisions are rendered invisible. Second is the absence of a bridge between this emerging technology that is seen as unfamiliar and people's experience with technology in the everyday, which becomes habitual and also invisible. And finally, and perhaps most importantly, is the lack of a conceptual space for experience-sharing, reflecting, and collecting problem-solving and decision-making.
 So we think the design can help. Well, I'm a designer, of course I think that. And why design can indeed help to hide those decisions sometimes, as you can have many examples of products that do that, there has been several examples of speculative design projects that surface contentious issues and even provide the bridge between emerging and familiar technology. It is, however, not quite clear how we designers can provide a reconciliation between the critique and the course of action for technology co-implementation.
 So Kruakae and I have worked together to devise a method that would support this reconciliation, and this method includes speculative design, drama, and deliberation.
 So we are particularly interested in energy, and more specifically, in new models of energy distribution which are supported by technology such as blockchains, smart contracts, and smart batteries. So one application of smart batteries is, for example, in vehicles to grid systems, where batteries transact energy directly with the grid. So this way, vehicles not only consume energy but also distribute it, becomes distributed of energies,
 which is quite, we found fascinating. So we designed the GigBliss hair dryers, which aimed to demonstrate how devices with autonomous batteries could support different levels of control while also supporting different interests and values. So we designed them as a conversational tool.
 So similar to vehicle to grid systems, the GigBliss hair dryers transact energy directly with the grid, and the transaction is defined
 by smart contracts hosted in a blockchain, not like the blockchain that we saw in the previous presentation, but a blockchain like Etherium or Hyperledger. And the profit of our loss from these transactions are automatically sent to a digital wallet. But then I ask, "What would change if the owner "of this wallet changes?" And this is what we wanted to demonstrate with the different hair dryers.
 So if GigBliss Plus, the holder of this wallet is the user, so the user buys the hair dryer, perhaps at a higher price, and synchronizes their digital wallet with the hair dryer, which allows them to cover costs and collect profit from managed transactions.
 In the GigBliss Balance, however, the GigBliss corporation holds the wallet, so the corporation would lend or perhaps make the hair dryer available to consumers at a very low price, while holding the profit, as always, the pressure to reduce losses in energy transactions.
 So finally, with GigBliss Auto, both hair dryers and energies would be subsidized by a third party which would, for instance, pay an X amount to the GigBliss corporation to distribute the hair dryers and provide energy to a specific group.
 So we invited three actors to consider scenarios as well as underlying implications of using the hair dryers. We filmed their improvisations, and then chose three of the most provocative sketches to use in our deliberation sessions, which Kruakae will present. But I will show you excerpts of these sketches right now,
 - So how does design meet drama meet public policy? Well, drama is frequently used in design, but not as often used in policy-making. The common ambition in design and public policies is public support. Often in both design and public policy, getting public support goes so far as product testing and political polls. We argue, however, that people should be given more opportunities to articulate the kind of technology-mediated world they want to be living in. And in this way, help shape the development of technologies and relevant policies. But often, future is a stretch of people's imagination, so it's difficult for them to talk about.
 For both design and public policy deliberation, drama makes relatable to personal experience what might otherwise be unimaginable. In this specific case, what might otherwise be, in this specific case, the dramatic sketch and the theater improvisation gives people the context of views situating the new technology in a more familiar reality of their day to day life, and this is an example of how we used that.
 kind of set up a system where you could basically change the peak times and non-peak times,
 the participants to play the role of different types of users, and from this experience, they started to think about different purpose of use for technologies and start to critique it. And this is just their warmup exercise.
 Um, so, drama also provides a sketch of communicative protocol for deliberation, easing the challenge of breaking the first word. Deliberation is a talk-based process to reach mutually acceptable solutions to social problems through an exchange of and a reflection on stories, experiences, opinions, argumentation, and preservation. The value of deliberation is empathetic reasoning rather than partisan position-taking and an obsession with winning a debate.
 So to design deliberation provides a protocol for communication that supports critical design to achieve its societal aim of empowering people to articulate their values and preferences for future technologies.
 Given the objective of deliberation being collective problem-solving, we follow a four-step process. This includes story sharing, problem definition, solution brainstorming, and resolution.
 - So in this video, you saw the flow of deliberation from experience sharing, in this case,
 and then the beginning of the solution brainstorming.
 hopefully I'll get to the next slide.
 Ah, there you go. This is a more detailed snapshot of the deliberation. So here you see the repertoire of deliberation moving from rejection to working out why they rejected the design, and arriving at, so what would work? Note the reference to the evolution of the phone. The parallel that the participants drew between the phone and the future technology, in this case, GigaBliss Plus hair dryer, demonstrates the success of drama as a bridge between the familiar technology, the phone, and the unfamiliar future features of technologies.
 So here on the slide, you see, the table summarizes the values deduced from various suggested solutions to what participants deemed problematic. These values highlight strong sense of agency. This gives us an insight into what people expect from autonomous technologies.
 So far we've seen that speculative design, drama, and deliberation combined allows us to elicit people's values and preferences for autonomous distributed technologies. The articulated desired functionality, sensibility, and rationality of human experience with autonomous technologies contribute societal and civic values that are often overwhelmed by economic values underpinning the focus of affirmative design on market and innovation.
 As they stand, these societal and civic values provide blueprints for public support. Given the appropriate level of advocacy, these values could shape policies' implementation strategies and design for autonomous technologies, making these technologies and their usage better serve public interest, and that's it.
 Thank you very much. (audience applauding) Any questions? - [Moderator] The floor is open for any questions you might have. I do have a question myself, if you don't mind. So when it comes to, in your opinion, what's the core factor that comes out of drama and deliberation? The core contribution. - Um, so. Well, I think, now, in the paper, we also describe the different stages. We use drama in different ways, both to insonate these prototypes and dramatize a little bit what they are doing, and in the policy, and I think Kruakae talked a lot about that in the presentation, the role of that in policy research for people to embody, embody the scenarios that, and really remembering how they felt about a particular technology, a particular context, because they can theorize that, but when you put yourself in the shoes of, that situation's quite different. So I think that is the conditions. - So if I understand your question correctly, you asked cost factor, right? - [Moderator] Core contribution. - Oh, core contribution. Well, um, I think it goes to also acceptance. It's building onto what other factors that would allow people to embrace something new, and this, by learning in greater details about what people actually want, you standing a better chance of delivering what meets the demands. - [Moderator] Thank you. - There's a question there. - [Audience Member] Yeah, hi, thank you, Rachel Jones. I'm very interested in this, I'm working in this area, so it's really interesting. Now, you used as your object the hair dryer, as such, and I wondered, although that created the conversation, in a way, and helped the drama, which was in a way the intervention, I wondered if you'd chosen a different object if you'd created a slightly different conversation. Because the hair dryer feels very personal. So could you say why that object was chosen and how you could abstract, say, from that object to other objects? - Yeah, I think the aim of the project was, well, the project was sponsored by the EU Policy Lab, and the aim was really to provoke some discussion. So we really wanted to get into the personal level and have some object that people relate to, but it has this feeling of a little bit strange, it's not really a kettle that has been used so many times, but it's also not a battery that is anonymous and it's in your house, as there are many applications nowadays. So the hair dryer was really, we wanted something that is slightly provocative and strange, yes. - You also created the kettle. - Yes, well, this is also a series of projects that's part of a bigger project called Autonomous Energy Systems, so there are some other objects that I can advertise now that we are developing right now, which is a kettle that is less focused on the speculative side of that and more focused about how people would live within autonomous systems that, with an autonomous system that would do these transactions in the home, but then we chose a kettle because the kettle is less strange and is less provocative, somehow, so people would adopt that and would use it, yes. - And so we tested, to answer your question, we tested the kettle in a slightly different context. We didn't use drama, but we used the concept of drama in terms of organizing people's experience. And kettle created a different type of conversation, possibly because of the cultural effect. So when it comes to people not being able to boil the kettle in order, and then therefore can't make tea, in the English context, that's a big deal. (laughing) - Yes, but these objects are really like research artifacts that can have different behaviors, yeah. And yeah, the hair dryers had this particular characteristic. - [Audience Member] I was wondering, too, with the choice of drama, thinking, I've read a bit about design fiction and other kind of forms of helping people imagine. So could you talk a bit about what led you to focus on drama specifically, or other kind of ways of helping people imagine different future that you'd consider? - Yeah, there is plenty of research in ACI and people who presented here at CHI, and I'm seeing some faces, who worked with drama before in amazing ways. We tried to reference all of them in the paper, I hope we did cover. But in our case, drama was more, well, again, we used drama in two different ways. But I think it's brilliant to either get people to perform and try to put themselves in the situations or to give them more experiential scenario of designs that might be critical, yes. - So also the drama aspect, in connection with design, we also wanted to dramatize the issues that, or what would be a little bit problematic, what we hope people would find problematic, and act that out. - Yeah, and I must say that we left the actors to just do their job, and they were absolutely brilliant. They got it without, and they raised issues that we didn't think before. So for us, it was absolutely brilliant to work with them. Yeah, they're very creative and imaginative, and yeah. - So in this way, drama actually frames, or as a question, or a pitch, a problem, for people to consider it, rather than telling them that this is what we assume to be a problem for you. - [Moderator] Thank you, and this concludes our session for today. You've all been brilliant.
 (audience applauding)
 The SEC staff as well, and also the student volunteers. Thank you all. Enjoy your lunch, and paper sessions should come back by two p.m.
