
 - Thanks. This work was done with Alix, who has now moved to University of Grenoble in France. It was done in the FIT Lab at Swansea University. Alix has a very nice talk about modular devices, called PickCells, at 11 o'clock tomorrow. So, coming back to Pulp Friction, what we have done is, so, we looked at a different portion of the body for haptic feedback. That is the periphery of the finger pad. So, we are used to having haptic feedback of pad of the finger, but we are looking at the periphery of the finger.
 So, if I may ask you, could you like hold your mobile phones in your hands? So, you hold it, and then imagine it's vibrating. It's vibrating to give you a different haptic notifications. So, do you really use different pattern of vibration for your applications? For example, long or short vibrations for your WhatsApp message. Different vibration patterns for your applications? Do you usually, how many of you use, can I have a raise of hands? Oh, a few of them, that's good. So, two highly motivating examples.
 So, recently, they're having lots of work, lots of work. So, these are two well known recent ties. Where we are instrumenting the finger to give a different type of haptic feedback. For example, the top one would give some rotational and translation ones. And the bottom one is pseudo transition and normal forces. What we really want to do is not instrument the finger, but use natural grips and use the periphery of the finger for some kind of modifications or haptic feedback. So that's our goal.
 So the main contributions of the paper is look at the periphery of the finger pad. So, this is something that has not been explored before.
 And then we also give a prototype that would be used for haptic feedback in the periphery of the finger.
 Then we give a controlled study in the paper to design-space for this kind of feedback system.
 for having peripheral finger pad haptic feedback system. Those are the main contributions of the paper.
 and this is a lot of work, this is from recent where a... This model is used along with a small attachment to drive conduction to the base of the index finger. And another one.
 They used mini magnetic shafts. I learned that they gave Alander a base of the index finger to poke the index finger at different locations. So, these are related because we also conduct similar scenarios where we take the ball and rub and poke against the finger pad on different locations. And we perform similar scenarios.
 So, coming to Pulp Friction, the overview of the system is that
 it's a back of the device system. What you have is small detectors. It could be a ball bearing or anything that can could come and alter finger from different angles. And then you can rub the finger in different patterns again, under the side of the finger. In addition to that, we can also vibrate the taciturn. And we can add the vibration to both poke and vibration. And pattern and vibration.
 with our finger different speeds for both poking and rubbing and also with different sizes for both poking and rubbing. Not only that, one can imagine different kinds of items, like having a texture, or having a thermal or some heat, or other features, or soft, hardness, or other things that we can use the tacturn could be as long as it comes close to the side of the finger. So in the paper, we have limited mention of the scenarios. And we use the study understand and be easy to recognize the distinct stimuli on the finger pad and also we give you some spatio-temporal patterns for haptic feedback.
 So then we're gonna mention the paper on evaluation, where we looked at how fast we can move the ball bearing. We can move what we tested into the speeds. 10 millimeters per second and 20 millimeters per second, and we saw that the ball bearing moves very steadily and the noise was only .26 millimeters. We looked at different sizes ranging from 3 millimeters to 13 millimeters.
 We included 16 participants with different age range. 6 females mostly, right-handed and only one computer scientist with 30 days experience. All of them had way less experience with haptic systems.
 Okay, so during the experiment, we deployed and put the tape upside down for the back of the device near you. We asked users to rest their arm on the arm rest, elbow on arm rest, so we avoid them going arm reflex. We had a camera to monitor the movements of the ball bearing and then we had a midline UI for the users to input their values left hand settings.
 That's more in the paper. For the mini tests, or for the tests, we basically did two tests. One is the angle. It's for poking from different angles. And pattern is for rubbing the finger for different patterns. For clusters, we looked at different types of stimuli, and then we also looked at where the stimuli was felt. For the pattern, we looked at different speed and size, like thick or thin, and also we looked at the strength and comfort for all the stimuli.
 So, in our tests, we saw that there was a linear trend for different angles, but obviously due to human factors there, or will not. And it is not clear how many reasons one could really use in a useful manner.
 So, we did some studies. So we have three separate tests for all the different modes.
 And we found that we have distinct regions to sense poke, vibration, and poke plus the vibration. I come back to these later, but notice that here we can have one, two, one, two, three, four non-overlapping regions for vibration and similarly here for poke plus vibration. So those, i often think of them like I think of paper you might think that might be higher validity we only have four regions bu, we design to have them all connected.
 One was we opened running up and down on the left hand side and on the right hand side and on the top of the finger and then under the clockwise running and then the counterclockwise running. So five patterns, and we found that the overall recognition rate was 92.4%
 So if you look at the confusion metrics, we can see that it's a bit low on the clockwise and counterclockwise patterns and also a bit low on the (mumbling) What we saw that actually few participants consistently confused between clockwise and counterclockwise. It might be because the backup device in that area are highly imagined. I'll come back to it later. And also, we noticed that the tip of the finger was actually less sensitive and the inside of the finger is higher sensitive and that's where we have higher results here.
 So, look, analyzing the effect of size and speed in using the statistics system, we saw that. We looked at error in size. The participants told us the error in the actual diameter of the ball assessed. And speed information where they actually could guess if it was fast speed or low speed or even if they missed it. So, we saw that. There was no significant difference of patterns on the size. So, I think this means it usually implies any size and any speed in the range we used on it do more. It's not very sensitive to that. We saw that ErrorSize is 2.1 millimeter, so possibly one could use small and large balls also.
 For the strength and effort, we saw that there was no significant effect of pattern and angle on strength and comfort. And the only significant effect was the size of the ball. So, basically for different stimuli, they will feel similar strength and similar comfort so it's quite good news.
 in the paper, and we have some examples here. I just saw before that like four unconnected regions on the tip of the, on the periphery of your finger that allow the use of haptic feedback. If you poke, you can have a five stimuli points where, for example, this is just an example, but it be done on your own locations. And for vibrations, it's a wonderful use, four points for vibrations. So, again, we saw that vibration fit more square, which is not true, compared to the poke, and also we noticed that outer from the fingertip, the haptic resolution was low, because it's better for the inside of the finger than the outside.
 So, for pattern, we saw that we consist of accounting for the confusion by the participants between clockwise and counterclockwise. The recognition rate actually went up to 98.4, so it's quite good. In the operation, it went up to 98.4, so we can match all the patterns with a lot of confidence. So, in the interview, we asked them for different patterns, which is fine, but, we ask them for different patterns, if they could, for example, instead of going up and down on the left edge of the finger, if they would be able to do an up movement or down a movement they will be pretty confident to do that. That is more space for designing more patterns. And from this, we found it possible to use balls of more than 5 millimeter diameter across to have different sizes, so parts will be (mumbling) And also, speed. They need to have 10 seconds apart to be used to recognize speed.
 Okay, so from strength, we saw that vibration gets stronger stimuli. Bigger ball gets stronger forced stimuli, for example, poking, and smaller gets stronger vibration stimuli. For comfort, there was no preference apart from size. But we noticed that if it's a smaller ball, the effect was stronger. So, why don't we use for example a smaller ball for communication.
 So, let's stop of each get the study for using the periphery of the finger pad for haptic feedback
 and many of the participants understand this . So one was an eye-free compass. One could use the direction and the proximity information direction as in cooking, and proximity I'm going to give the example of looking from one finger to the other. To get you some eye-free compass applications. This could be obviously used if you want a distraction, because you won't be looking at the screen, and for example, it could be used for in-pocket and set use also.
 And then, for discrete notifications, because now the entire phone is not vibrating, you're getting localized haptic feedback. So, it's not ambiguous and it could be used for discrete notifications.
 One could also have accessible features in this, not only because of the first tactile haptic feedback on the mobile phone, but also now you have tend to some of the notifications to the tactile and save on screen space for some accessible features.
 that using the periphery of the finger pad is a good idea for haptic feedback. And it's a new modality.
 And hopefully the prototype can be deadlocked to be deployed on our buy forum.
 And we gave you design space and found out that five peripheral zones for poking and vibration could be used
 and then well, obviously, there's more information in the paper. I encourage you to read the paper.
 (applause) - (moderator) We have time for questions, so if you have any questions, please come up. (camera shutters) - (participant) I was wondering, how did you get the outline of the hands. Like, did you capture it, or did you hard code and everything, whatever people had their hands in, and yep. And basically I was wondering if you had some kind of feedback about whether in the bowl today, actually knows about I don't know, the tension of the fingers that can actually pull it or something. - I don't know. - That's a very good question, and I missed, I forgot to mention that. So, you know, use the study. For each participant, we measured the width, fist measure, and length of the finger. Of the proximal distal, the tall part of the finger. And then we mapped it to the parameters set for each user so that it's consistent. For example, the ball that would have been used, always suggest a part that's on the weakest part. So we want to be consistent (mumbling) and because it's in a mapping system, that's something new. If it had been accurate, so as long as we can say it's got this ball throughout the center So, alternating it insures it has contact with the finger. By making it fit inside the finger. - (participant) If you were to use the bull, like, is that call hard to phone? Do you, like, everyone is holding the phone how differently? - Obviously that's a difficult one, because, we want you to know is it possible to use the periphery of the finger? Or is it impossible? Well, why doesn't (mumbling) Now, what they are trying to do, they wrote a system on the back of the form, have some kind of finger sensing and ultimately do with it what you want. - (moderator) Okay, thanks again.
